these are live images from Southern
Israel looking towards the Gaza Strip a
ceasefire between Hamas and Israel is
due to come into effect right now these
seven weeks of fighting have been the
deadliest in the history of the Israel
Palestinian conflict more than 1200
Israelis were killed in the October 7th
terrorist attacks by Hamas and the Hamas
run Health Ministry in Gaza says
Israel's response has killed nearly
15,000
Palestinians
I'm Hannah huml welcome to the show that
Qatari broker ceasefire is due to last
for 4 days but could be extended the
pause in fighting will allow the
exchange of hostages held by Hamas for
Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli
jails if all goes to plan that is
expected to take place later today we'll
go live to Jerusalem in a minute but
first let's take a look at this
report after weeks of waiting the
families of hostages hope their loved
ones will come home
soon I want to hope I hope hope hope
that it's going to happen we've been on
such a roller coaster for the past
certainly the past uh week but since
October 7th between Despair and Trauma
and
hope I just want to see the children
come back the Hamas terror group has
agreed to release 50 civilian Women and
Children of which 13 ought to be
released in the first bch on Friday in
exchange Israel is set to release 150
Palestinian prisoners mostly females and
teenage males over the course of the
truths the deal mediated by Qatar also
includes a 4-day pause in fighting in
both the North and South of the Gaza
Strip as well as increased humanitarian
Aid even though the agreement is
considered a breakthrough both sides
have remained cautious about saying too
much before it
materializes based on current
circumstances with the start of this
truce our main hope is that this
humanitarian truce will give us all the
opportunity to look into the bigger task
which is to implement a permanent truce
and Achieve longlasting
peace efforts are being made to extend
the truth beyond the 4-day period but
Israel insists it will resume its
military operation in Gaza until it has
eradicated
Hamas International humanitarian Aid
trucks in Egypt await approval to head
towards the Rafa Crossing with Gaza in
addition to Essentials like food and
water tankers will also be taking in
fuel Egypt said 130,000 lers of diesel
and four trucks of gas would be
delivered daily to Gaza including 200
trucks of Aid that would boost the aid
deliveries that the UN and other Aid
agencies say are needed in the
territory Hiba T is the country director
for the NGO care in the pal Palestinian
territories she told us what the NGO
plans to do during this 4-day
ceasefire uh we are coordinating with
our peer humanitarian organizations and
what we are going to do and focus on is
related to human to health uh
interventions where we are going to
distribute hygiene kits focus on uh
providing a medical services for the
refugees and shelters and uh especially
in the South uh continue distribu
medical supplies for for the hospitals
and of course continue with the with
what we call Hygiene kits distribution
that are very very much needed uh this
that has been said it's not it's not
only that that is needed people are
waiting today in the morning we all were
waiting for the the pause but
unfortunately when it did not happen I
can't tell you what was the impact on
people on my colleagues for instance
calling us sending us messages that they
they really really wish for for at least
one night of proper
sleeping that was Hiba TB country
director for the NGO care in rala well
let's cross over now to our
correspondent Tanya Kramer who's
following the story for us in Jerusalem
Tanya this is a huge moment that so many
people have been waiting for how are
people in Israel feeling now that the
ceasefire appears to be imminent and
that some of the Israeli hostages kept
captive in Gaza could soon be finally
returning
home
well that's right I mean Israeli media
are talking about a very emotional day
of course we've seen also overnight
intensive Israeli shelling on Gaza with
more casualties there but also air rid
Sirens up to the last moment uh up to 7
a.m. here local time that was expected
that you know the fighting intensifies
before this PA and fighting comes into
place and in Israel people are now of
course watching very uh closely whether
this uh ceasefire this temporary
ceasefire uh will hold but of course all
eyes are now on the afternoon this is
when the first uh hostages are expected
to be released we were told that should
happen around 4 p.m. local time the
families uh of those first 13 hostages
uh are were notified last night uh we
were told that there's a lot of you know
caution as well because this is such a
fragile truth and such an unprecedented
situation as well I mean Israelis have
seen prisoner swaps and hostage releases
before but not on the scale and not
involving children these are the first
uh hostages that are expected uh to be
uh released this afternoon and of course
they're expecting as well that this
continues in the in the coming days up
to 50 hostages should be released but
there are also mixed feelings because
there are also many other host es that
will remain in Gaza and it's still
unclear uh how this will play out uh if
uh and when the fighting uh will uh
resume so many people cautiously hopeful
there what more can you tell us about
Israel's agreement to release
Palestinian prisoners in return for
these
hostages well as we heard um in the
report before I mean there is uh Israel
released a list of 300
uh um Palestinians that are held in
Israeli prisons uh we understand that
some of the names have been approved we
don't know exactly how many of them will
be released today but according to the
agreement between uh that was brokered
by Qatar uh 150 uh Palestinian prisoners
should be released in this uh first
stage so we understand they will be
gathered from uh different uh prisons uh
later today uh at least the numbers we
don't know how many will be released
today but they will be then brought to
uh uh checkpoints and then released into
the occupied West Bank where then
families uh uh will uh be able to
receive them there they're preparing uh
for this as well and of course we also
have to talk about Gaza we understand
that uh you know part of this uh
agreement there's also that more
humanitarian Aid will go into Gaza that
people will get some respite uh but of
course the big question is um many of
those 1.7 million people that have been
displaced in the past 7 weeks they won't
be able to just go home uh they are in
the South and it's uh unclear whether
they can you know go to the north uh
it's uh and and many have no home to go
to obviously yeah so many unknowns there
and the ceasefire is planed to last 4
days but Israel's military says it's
already planning what it says are the
next stages of this war what could these
next stages inent
well Israel has made it very clear that
uh this is just a break and fighting a
pause in fighting and they said the war
will resume um there is uh the
possibility of extending uh this PA and
fighting uh for every 10 as they said in
this agreement for every 10 hostages
that will be released there might be an
extension by one day up to 10 days uh we
heard the uh Israeli defense minister
you have gallan saying that he expects
another two months at least of War
because they want you know to eliminate
as they say dismantle all the cap
capabilities uh of Hamas and they
haven't yet reached that goal uh so this
war will continue one way or another uh
so this is just basically uh a break and
a pause in the
fighting I just like to add that those
are live pictures coming us H coming to
us from Gaza now um as you can see there
Tanya Kramer in Jerusalem thank you so
much for all of your
updates well for more I have our Middle
East analyst shaie rosanes with me here
in the studio uh shaie Israel was very
much unified in the fight against Hamas
but is it just as unified when it comes
now to implementing this ceasefire well
it's not really there is we've seen when
the cabinet was um discussing that there
were voices in the right that are
against this there's a they're saying
that it's immoral to leave some of the
hostages out while others are are going
to be released and there's also the big
fear in Israel that this will be
actually they losing momentum and re you
know starting again that fight uh is not
going to be really possible and this is
de facto the end of the war where
there's still a lot of as we see Hamas
is strong Hamas is uh functioning Hamas
is negotiating with Israel it's not
really anywhere near where Israel wants
it to be let's talk about the families
of the host hostages because they are an
important part of this whole Arrangement
they've been putting a lot of pressure
on the Israeli government are the
families of the hostages uh are they
satisfied that the Israeli government's
priorities are in the right place here
well in a way it's a relief because
there was a lot of fear in the last
almost 50 days that they're not being
taken seriously enough that Israel is
too occupied with the military um
offensive um but this is not a Happy Day
in Israel first of all there'll only be
13 and even in the end of the these um
days if we're talking about 50 maybe
more if uh the ceasefire is extended
into 70 or 80 that still lives Hamas
with over 150 people in custody I mean
and and in hostages uh and these people
U many of them are wounded um they're
also tearing apart families we will see
mothers and their children but there are
whole families that were taking hostage
the fathers that the men are left behind
Hamas sees part part of the uh hardships
and the discussion about the deal was
Hamas sees a soldier as any man who ever
served in the isra in the Israel
military doesn't matter he is now 60 and
he's been discharged already 40 years
ago um and therefore the bringing these
people out is going to be very hard and
this is actually the biggest Milestone
ahead for Israel and for the Israeli
leadership because um these hostages um
it's actually there' have been a sort of
Av liability on Hamas the children and
the the mothers um talking about the men
the soldiers that's going to be
harder there is a lot of international
pressure on on Israel to come up with
some sort of ceasefire a humanitarian
pause in the fighting uh we're now here
at what is supposed to be humanitarian
pause it's very early hours we don't
know how this is going to unfold uh it's
a very delicate uh ceasefire how much of
a role did that International pressure
play in Israel's decision to ultimately
go ahead with this major because Israel
feels that it doesn't have too many
leverages it doesn't have too many cards
to play you know it's the attack
happened on October
7th around 240 people were were taken
hostage um and then Israel was was left
with you know Kamas is setting the the
conditions on the ground I mean Israel
feels like it doesn't really have much
against Hamas because it still wants to
maintain this and and secure the
livelihood of those 240 people um they
felt this is why they felt that
pressuring uh Hamas through the
offensive on the ground and Through The
Siege will be the only way to create
some leverage to create some cards that
they can use uh in order to to get get
some gains uh in this terrible tragic uh
situation uh it's still probably not
going to be enough the world would like
to see more humanitarian Aid coming we
have to remember it's more than
humanitarian these are basic needs and
we're talking about about two million
people because the whole Northern Gaza
uh most of it is empty there were over 1
million people who who had to flee
Northern Gaza into the South um and
there's also a big question about what's
happening now in the north because
they're estimated around 880,000
Palestinians still there U they are not
allowed to get any access to this
humanitarian Aid coming in um and
they're not allowed to cross this is the
biggest challenge now for Israel Hamas
has been calling people to cross from
the south up to the North during the
ceasefire Israel is trying to fight that
and to stop the population from reima
Back to the north what can you tell us
about the negotiations in Qatar that led
up to this because I'm hearing that
there were weeks of negotiations going
on in the background they must have been
very intense of course they're secretive
but what happened there how did we get
here well we know that this deal in its
General scheme was actually offered
already last week uh it took some time
for the Israeli uh leadership to be
willing to say yes to that they felt
like they need more time uh for the
military operation to run its course
there was always the Hope also in Israel
that maybe they'll be finding enough
leads you know the soldiers on the
ground going into the tunnels going into
Gaza will find enough leads to bring it
home some hostages without the need for
a deal with Hamas that failed and
eventually the Israelis have decided
that they need to save as many as they
can as long as they can um the Qatar has
been running running forth the Americans
have put a lot of pressure um we've seen
yesterday a bit of a stall um and Kar
there felt like it's putting its own
reputation on the line and it was
pushing very strong pamas to not back
off um and it's still a very gentle very
delicate situation everybody is you know
watching the other side very carefully
um everything can still many can still
go wrong and I wouldn't count on this to
only last 4 days it's probably in Israel
is saying that Israel is calculating
Hamas will try to stall we try to say
wait we need more time and so on but as
you say this is a delicate ceasefire
we're just in the first hour of it
really we have to wait for it to really
fully take effect and see if there's
anyone who's going to spoil it uh
because there there have been a lot of
warnings about that as well we seem to
be in a rare moment with with both Hamas
and Israel it seemed to feel that they
can benefit from some time off Israel
before uh initiating its operation on
the southern part of the strip and and
Hamas of course for the need to uh
recover recoup and and so on and also
again there's some sort of an estimation
that having those families those young
kids elderly women in custody hostages
in Gaza was actually a liability for
Hamas okay we'll have to leave it there
uh shaie thank you very much that was
our Middle East analyst shaie
Rosales you are watching DW news of
course we're covering the uh the
beginning of what is supposed to be a
4-day ceasefire in Israel International
uh in Gaza International humanitarian
Aid trucks in Egypt are now waiting for
the green light to head through the Rafa
Crossing into Gaza in addition to
Essentials like food and water tankers
will also be bringing fuel these live
images from the Rafa border crossing
show those Aid trucks lined up there at
the border Israel uh Egypt rather says
that 130,000 L of diesel and four trucks
of gas will be delivered daily into Gaza
including 200 trucks of Aid that would
boost the aid deliveries that the UN and
other Aid agencies say are needed in the
territory journalist ham baloa was in
Gaza until recently he joins us now from
Jordan's capital am man uh tell us what
will the ceasefire mean for the people
of
Gaza it means a lot it means for people
to uh check their places to uh um to be
released from the pressure from ongoing
bombardment that lasted for um 48 days
um many people um huge number of
displaced people not only from the north
to the South even from Southern areas uh
from eastern border or even for those
who are remaining in Gaza City and the
north to check their places and uh for
medical staff to remove some of the
bodies still remain under the rubble um
in in Gaza City or other places in in in
in in Gaza STP um as long as for the aid
to come in um to get some some help
people can can um um try to find some
some other places to move they were
under pressure of moving in in the
previous
days now those Aid trucks again we're
looking at pictures of the Rafa border
crossing they're lined up waiting to
bring that Aid in uh hundreds of trucks
H understand are supposed to be able to
enter during the truce what do people in
Gaza need most right now
ham people need first food uh water and
uh of course fuel for uh running the the
facilities um um um um the food was was
very limited and there was a huge
shortage of food not only for Aid that
delivered or distributed to the to the
shelters uh all kind of food are um um
um are food is missing in in Gala St I I
talk to to people there from my family
or friends or ordinary people I'm trying
to reach um they tell me that most of
the supermarkets um um are empty shelves
are not I mean like not nothing on them
um um many like drinking water is is
hard to get so these are the main thing
they need uh from the aid or the
deliveries that would expect to come to
Gaza now Israel says it will halt the
movement of military vehicles on the
main Gaza Highway that North to South
Highway uh they're going to Halt those
military vehicles so people can travel
South can can use that road to to walk
to the South presumably do you think
gazin who haven't already left the north
for the South will do so
now um it depends actually um I saw um
many footages from the morning still
some people are trying to to head north
from the South not a huge number yet but
um some people of course will will were
waiting for for this POS to be able to
move from North to the South it's not um
um easy mission for many people for old
people to walk that long there is no
Transportation available in in in in the
city um um many people were told like
they have no places to go and the
situation in the south is not that safe
or uh proper for them to move so that
made them to stay in Gaza despite of the
danger that they exposed to um I'm sure
many people would would would move um
from North north to south but still some
people will try to go from South to the
north as you're speaking ham we're
looking at some live pictures I'm I'm
told that they are from the Kan Unice
Hospital inside Gaza um so ham the
release of detainees from Israeli jails
is also part of this deal uh how
important is that for the
Palestinians it's very I mean the
prisoners
um issue and the Deton is very essential
issue for the Palestinians whether in
Gaza Strip or the West Bank the majority
of the prisoners um are from West Bank
cities um and today we are expecting um
according to the reports 39 uh uh uh
detes will be released uh to the West
Bank cities uh always the factions and
ordinary people talk about this
essential issue um um to to be solved
and they are willing to see the their
beloved people released and freed from
the
prisons are there hopes ham among the
Palestinians that this uh temporary
ceasefire will become
permanent this is the main hope uh
everybody I talk to um all the comments
um on on social media that I have read
um they are they are hoping that this
will hold first and it's not limited to
4 days which is not enough for them
after um um devastating and and hard
time that experience for 48 days um that
they need um to to this war to stop and
they are looking for a complete
ceasefire and to be able to return their
house or to bury their the the Beloved
people um buddies who were still under
the rle um many people are talking about
this and they are willing for this and
they think this 4 day um Bose is not
enough uh for that ham thank you very
much for talking with us again that was
journalist hm Balia in Iman
Jordan thank
you